---
layout: post
title:  Z-ing in the right direction? A closer look at the European banking system's stability 
date: 2022-01-08 21:00:00
description: blog on z-score
tags: r-plot financial economics
categories: sample-posts
---
If there is one measure that we can trust to give us an overall risk situation of the banking operations, arguably it'd be the z-score. Primarily, it is due to the fact that its calculation reflects profit and equity rather than just loan book items. In this short blog, we will try to cover the basic premise of the concept at the micro level. How it can provide us a larger picture of an economy's banking system? And finally, what insights we can obtain by observing the z-score of European banks before and after the global pandemic?

So let's just dive in!
 
At it's core, a z-score predicts the probability of bankruptcy, where high score generally means less chances of being insolvent. Since it first got published by Prof. Altman in 1968, z-score has been used extensively used not just by academics, but also by practiotioners, analysts and regulators. In his recent paper, Prof. Altman has defined some of the applications which are given in the table below [^1]:


| External Analytics | Internal and Research Analytics|
| :-------| :-----------:|
| Lenders, Bond Investors | To File or Not (e.g., General Motors) Comparative Risk Profiles Over Time      |
| Long/Short Investment Strategy on Stocks | Industrial Sector Assessment (e.g., Energy)
| Security Analysts & Rating Agencies	| Sovereign Default Risk Assessment
Regulators and Government Agencies	| Purchasers, Suppliers Assessment

As far as banks are concerned, we use a slightly modified version of the original z-score. 

$$Z = \frac{ROA+(LR)}{\sigma(ROA)}$$

where, $ROA$ is return on assets, $LR$ is the leverage ratio measured as a fraction of equity and assets, and $\sigma(ROA)$ is the standard deviation of return on assets. Just by looking at the formula, an intuition can be developed. A z-score objectively measures the bank's ability to counter risk by using a ratio of its profits and equity to every single unit of volatility. Therefore, greater the number, higher is resistance towards risk shocks. 

Moving on to our next objective, that is to define what z-score could mean at the macro level. At the risk of overgeneralising, if we take aggregate values of equity, assets and profits, we can easily end up with a z-score of an industry or in our case, banking systems. What risks do we have in doing so? We might mask the variations that are present within a country's banking system. For example, ratios of small banks may differ from those of big banks in magnitude. Similarly, a higher ratio cannot be taken at its face value. Since it does not reveal what kind of risks encompass a particular group of banks within an economy. But we will ignore these issues for a moment for the sake of obtaining a wide perspective to see what aggregation entails. This may lead us towards benchmarking for comparison of different states. 

If we were to take the formula above, we can easily translate its meaning to the macro level. Commercial banking system's z-score, as per World Bank's definition, **"captures the probability of default of a country's banking system. Z-score compares the buffer of a country's banking system (capitalization and returns) with the volatility of those returns."**

Even though it is quite difficult to objectively measure the true impact of the global pandemic on financial institutions, we can safely assume that banks had their work cut out as well. Be it digital payments, bailouts, or facilitation of day to day operations. In addition, reduced economic activity and higher credit risk for loans did not make their life easy.  If we take z-score as our parameter, we can observe a very interesting fact from the graph below.   


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/z-score.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
        </div>
</div>

---
**Note:**
Code for the above graph can be found at my github [repository](https://github.com/mdalifaisal/blogs/tree/main/z-score). Data has been taken from [Global Financial Database](https://databank.worldbank.org/metadataglossary/global-financial-development/series/GFDD.SI.01#:~:text=Z%2Dscore%20compares%20the%20buffer%20of%20a%20country's%20banking%20system,than%205%20bank%2Dlevel%20observations.)

---

Apart from Turkey and Poland, we do not observe any significant fall in the score after the worst crisis our financial markets have seen in the last 100 years. Even in the case of these two countries, the score is still above the benchmark that may raise any alarms. We also observe that some countries were able to improve their score.  If we compare the scores of US and UK, we also see a similar trend. US was able to achieve a z-score of 31.1 in 2021 from 30.3 in 2020, whereas UK had 18.1 in 2021, in comparison to 17.6 in 2020. 


Now the question that should be asked is how were scores improved even though our financial markets faced a once-in-a-lifetime crisis? This can be attributed to a number of factors: governments, central banks and/or decent coordination among financial institutions, supportive regulatory measures, strong capital levels, and good asset quality. Similarly, the decline could be attributed to the lack of these elements.

This blog was just an attempt to provide some instincts. For analysing a commercial banking system, we cannot just rely on an overall z-score. Instead, we have to take it in conjunction with other measures such as service structure, digitalization, ease of access etc.. In addition, even though financial markets in most European economies have weathered the storm in terms of navigating the crisis, financial stability needs constant monitoring through all sides. 


In addition, while we all know the advantage EU region has over other economies in terms of having connected markets. There is always some risk involved as financial crisis in one country can have ripple effects throughout the region.


[^1]: For the complete table please see [Altman, 2018](https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7072/6/3/70)


**_Disclaimer:_** All views are personal and do not represent those of any institutions.   


